NMS-14212: Event docs cleanup (#5002)
OpenNMS/opennms: docs/modules/operation/pages/events/sources/syslog.adoc

[[ga-events-sources-syslog]]
= Syslog Messages

> Syslog messages sent over the network to {page-component-title} can be transformed into events according to pre-configured rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Syslog messages sent over the network to {page-component-title} can be transformed into events according to preconfigured rules.
```

IMPORTANT: The syslogd service daemon, which enables {page-component-title} to receive syslog messages over the network, must be enabled for this functionality to work.

> This service daemon is disabled by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This daemon is disabled by default.
```

[options="header, %autowidth"]
[cols="3,3"]
|===
| Parser
| Description

| `org.opennms.netmgt.syslogd.CustomSyslogParser`
| Parser that uses a regex statement to parse the syslog header.

| `org.opennms.netmgt.syslogd.RadixTreeSyslogParser`
| Parser that uses an internal list of grok-style statements to parse the syslog header.

| `org.opennms.netmgt.syslogd.SyslogNGParser`
| Parser that strictly parses messages in the default pattern of syslog-ng.

| `org.opennms.netmgt.syslogd.Rfc5424SyslogParser`
| Parser that strictly parses the RFC 5424 format for syslog messages.
|===

=== RadixTreeSyslogParser

The `RadixTreeSyslogParser` normally uses a set of internally defined patterns to parse multiple syslog message formats.
To customize the set of patterns, you can put a new set of patterns into  `$\{OPENNMS_HOME}/etc/syslog-grok-patterns.txt`.

The patterns are defined in grok-style statements where each token is defined by a `%{PATTERN:semantic}` clause.
Whitespace in the pattern will match 0...n whitespace characters, and character literals in the pattern will match the corresponding characters.

> The `%` character literal must be escaped by using a backslash; for example, `\%`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `%` character literal must be escaped by using a backslash (for example, `\%`).
```

[options="header"]
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Pattern
| Description

| HOSTNAME
| String containing only valid hostname characters (alphanumeric plus '.', '-' and '_').

| HOSTNAMEORIP
| String containing only valid hostname characters or IP address characters (IPv4 or IPv6).

| INT
| Positive integer

| IPADDRESS
| String containing only valid IP address characters (IPv4 or IPv6).

| MONTH
| Three-character English month abbreviation

| NOSPACE
| String that contains no whitespace.

| STRING
| String.
Because this matches any character, it must be followed by a delimiter in the pattern String.

| WHITESPACE
| String that contains only whitespace (spaces and or tabs).
|===

[options="header"]
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Semantic Token
| Description

| day
| Two-digit day of month (1–31)

| facilityPriority
| Facility-priority integer

| hostname
| String hostname (unqualified or FQDN), IPv4 address, or IPv6 address

| hour
| Two-digit hour of day (0–23)

| message
| Remaining String message

| messageId
| String message ID

| minute
| Two-digit minute (0–59)

| month
| Two-digit month (1–12)

| parm*

> | String generic parameter where the parameter's key is the identifier following "parm" in the semantic token (for example, parmComponentId maps to a string parameter with key "ComponentId").

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Generic String parameter where the parameter's key is the identifier following "parm" in the semantic token (for example, parmComponentId maps to a string parameter with key "ComponentId").
```

Syslog messages sent over the network to {page-component-title} can be transformed into events according to preconfigured rules.

IMPORTANT: The Syslogd service daemon, which enables {page-component-title} to receive syslog messages over the network, must be enabled for this functionality to work.
This service daemon is disabled by default.

== Parsers

Different parsers can be used to convert the syslog message fields into {page-component-title} event fields.

[options="header, %autowidth"]

> |===

Reviewer: This table isn't rendering properly. The Description field is under the parser.

Author: doesn't have `cols` set.

| Parser
| Description

| `org.opennms.netmgt.syslogd.CustomSyslogParser`
| Parser that uses a regex statement to parse the syslog header.

| `org.opennms.netmgt.syslogd.RadixTreeSyslogParser`
| Parser that uses an internal list of grok-style statements to parse the syslog header.

| `org.opennms.netmgt.syslogd.SyslogNGParser`
| Parser that strictly parses messages in the default pattern of syslog-ng.

| `org.opennms.netmgt.syslogd.Rfc5424SyslogParser`
| Parser that strictly parses the RFC 5424 format for syslog messages.
|===

=== RadixTreeSyslogParser

The `RadixTreeSyslogParser` normally uses a set of internally defined patterns to parse multiple syslog message formats.
To customize the set of patterns, you can put a new set of patterns into  `$\{OPENNMS_HOME}/etc/syslog-grok-patterns.txt`.

The patterns are defined in grok-style statements where each token is defined by a `%{PATTERN:semantic}` clause.
Whitespace in the pattern will match 0...n whitespace characters, and character literals in the pattern will match the corresponding characters.

> The `%` character literal must be escaped by using a backslash, i.e., `\%`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `%` character literal must be escaped by using a backslash; for example, `\%`.
```

> NOTE: The RadixTreeSyslogParser's grok implementation only supports a limited number of pattern types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The RadixTreeSyslogParser's grok implementation supports only a limited number of pattern types.
```

To customize the set of patterns, you can put a new set of patterns into  `$\{OPENNMS_HOME}/etc/syslog-grok-patterns.txt`.

The patterns are defined in grok-style statements where each token is defined by a `%{PATTERN:semantic}` clause.
Whitespace in the pattern will match 0...n whitespace characters, and character literals in the pattern will match the corresponding characters.
The `%` character literal must be escaped by using a backslash; for example, `\%`.

NOTE: The RadixTreeSyslogParser's grok implementation supports only a limited number of pattern types.
However, these patterns should be sufficient to parse any syslog message format.

Arrange the patterns in the file from most specific to least specific, since the first pattern to successfully match the syslog message will be used to construct the {page-component-title} event.

[options="header"]
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Pattern
| Description

| HOSTNAME
| String containing only valid hostname characters (alphanumeric plus '.', '-' and '_').

| HOSTNAMEORIP
| String containing only valid hostname characters or IP address characters (IPv4 or IPv6).

| INT

> | Positive integer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Positive integer
```

| IPADDRESS
| String containing only valid IP address characters (IPv4 or IPv6).

| MONTH

> | Three-character English month abbreviation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Three-character English month abbreviation
```

| NOSPACE
| String that contains no whitespace.

| STRING
| String.

> Because this matches any character, it must be followed by a delimiter in the pattern string.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because this matches any character, it must be followed by a delimiter in the pattern String.
```

| WHITESPACE
| String that contains only whitespace (spaces and or tabs).
|===

[options="header"]
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Semantic Token
| Description

| day
| Two-digit day of month (1–31)

| facilityPriority
| Facility-priority integer

| hostname
| String hostname (unqualified or FQDN), IPv4 address, or IPv6 address

| hour
| Two-digit hour of day (0–23)

| message

> | Remaining string message

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Remaining String message
```

| messageId
| String message ID

| minute

> | Two-digit minute (0–59).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Two-digit minute (0–59)
```

| month

> | Two-digit month (1–12).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Two-digit month (1–12)
```

| parm*
| String generic parameter where the parameter's key is the identifier following "parm" in the semantic token (for example, parmComponentId maps to a string parameter with key "ComponentId").

| processId
| String process ID

| processName
| String process name

| second
| Two-digit second (0–59)

| secondFraction

> | One- to six-digit fractional second value as a string

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| One- to six-digit fractional second value as a String
```

[options="header"]
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Pattern
| Description

| HOSTNAME
| String containing only valid hostname characters (alphanumeric plus '.', '-' and '_').

| HOSTNAMEORIP
| String containing only valid hostname characters or IP address characters (IPv4 or IPv6).

| INT

> | Positive integer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Positive integer.
```

| IPADDRESS
| String containing only valid IP address characters (IPv4 or IPv6).

| MONTH

> | 3-character English month abbreviation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Three-character English month abbreviation.
```

| NOSPACE
| String that contains no whitespace.

| STRING
| String.
Because this matches any character, it must be followed by a delimiter in the pattern string.

| WHITESPACE
| String that contains only whitespace (spaces and or tabs).
|===

[options="header"]
[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Semantic Token
| Description

| day

> | 2-digit day of month (1-31)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Two-digit day of month (1–31)
```

| facilityPriority
| Facility-priority integer

| hostname

> | String hostname (unqualified or FQDN), IPv4 address, or IPv6 address

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| String hostname (unqualified or FQDN), IPv4 address, or IPv6 address
```

| hour

> | 2-digit hour of day (0-23)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Two-digit hour of day (0–23)
```

| message
| Remaining string message

| messageId
| String message ID

| minute

> | 2-digit minute (0-59)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Two-digit minute (0–59).
```

| month

> | 2-digit month (1-12)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Two-digit month (1–12).
```

| parm*
| String generic parameter where the parameter's key is the identifier following "parm" in the semantic token (for example, parmComponentId maps to a string parameter with key "ComponentId").

| processId
| String process ID

| processName

> | String process name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| String process name
```

| second

> | 2-digit second (0-59)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Two-digit second (0–59)
```

| secondFraction

> | 1- to 6-digit fractional second value as a string

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| One- to six-digit fractional second value as a string
```

| timezone
| String timezone value

| version
| Version

| year

> | 4-digit year

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Four-digit year
```
